## Description
At the beginning of the 1980s, Jacques Horneffer, librarian of the Geneva Conservatory of Music, discovered a collection of concert programmes in Geneva (today kept under the shelf number Rlg 35 in the library of the Geneva Conservatory of Music) consisting of nearly 12,000 units and covering the years 1826 to 1940. These documents of exceptional importance were packaged as soon as possible in suitable conservation material and then, thanks to the _onstage_ database initiated by the Haute Ecole de Musique de Lausanne (HEM) and RISM Switzerland, it was possible to digitize them and put them online in 2015.

It is completely unknown who gathered the first pieces of the collection - which predate by nine years the foundation of the Conservatoire de Musique de Genève in 1835 - and who was subsequently responsible for ordering these documents in cardboard folders glued on paper tabs. The collection includes almost all the programmes linked to the activities of the Geneva Conservatory (auditions, examinations, concerts) as well as those of the events organised in the large hall of the Place Neuve building, built in 1858, which was very quickly rented out to individuals or associations because of its acoustic qualities, which were unanimously recognised from the outset. It also includes an impressive quantity of concert programmes given in the city's main musical venues (St Pierre Cathedral, Théâtre de Neuve, Casino de St Pierre, then from the end of the 19th century, Grand-Théâtre, Victoria-Hall, Salle de la Réformation) as well as in halls or churches in Geneva and its surroundings. It includes all the programmes of the subscription symphony concerts, given from 1875 to 1918 by the Orchestre du Théâtre, then by the Orchestre de la Suisse Romande. It also contains the programmes of various series of symphonic or chamber music concerts, including those given throughout the Swiss National Exhibition of 1896.

While the first years of the 19th century show a still limited number of musical activities, there was a clear increase in the 1860s, 1890s and 1910s, when the volume of concerts practically doubled compared to the previous decade. Pianists, violinists, conductors, singers: the most prestigious performers from the end of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century succeeded one another in Geneva, whose vitality in musical life owes much to Hugo de Senger (1835-1892), then to Ernest Ansermet (1883-1969) who familiarised the people of Geneva with the music of their time. From the beginning of the 1880s, de Senger invited composers of great renown to conduct their works; thus Saint-Saëns, Massenet, Lalo, Tchaikovsky and later Grieg or d'Indy succeeded each other at the head of the Orchestre du Théâtre. In the last years of the 19th century, the presence of works by Swiss composers such as Hans Huber, Gustave Doret, Emile Jaques-Dalcroze and Friedrich Klose constantly increased.

A city of medium importance, Geneva thus became a not inconsiderable artistic centre at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries, a period which also corresponds to the development of its influence in the field of international cooperation. The programme collection kept at the Library of the Geneva Conservatory of Music is a living reflection of this development; it constitutes a major tool for the study of Swiss and Geneva musical life and, in particular, for the activities of the Conservatory.
