## Description

Attached to the Geneva Library since 1998, [La Musicale](http://www.bge-geneve.ch/musicale) is a public music lending library which also has a heritage collection. Among other things, it preserves a rich collection of more than 20,000 concert and theatre programmes from Geneva from the 19th century to the present day. This ephemera collection – one of the library&#39;s centres of excellence – is a representative reflection of Geneva&#39;s musical life.

This collection, organised according to a classification plan linked to concert halls and organisations, is preserved in conditions that guarantee its durability. It is classified chronologically and can be consulted on site by the public. The digitisation of a selection of programmes (approx. 10% of the collection) has made it possible to join _onstage_ in 2020. Only programmes from certain venues up to 1945 have been included in _onstage_, a date limit due, among other things, to copyright law.

La Musicale&#39;s programmes in _onstage_ come from a variety of sources, mostly from the [Victoria Hall](https://www.ville-ge.ch/culture/victoria\_hall/histoire.html). Around 1975, this large concert hall – built in 1894 by the British consul Daniel Fitzgerald Packenham Barton for the Harmonie nautique, then bequeathed to the City of Geneva in 1904 – divided its collection of programmes in two to give part of it to La Musicale. From the inauguration in 1894 to the present day, the programmes in this concert hall are almost complete, making it a truly exceptional collection. For the period retained in _onstage_ (until 1945), it is mainly symphonic concerts and recitals, the majority of which were given by the Orchestre de la Suisse Romande.

The oldest programmes also come from the collection of the library of the Grand Théâtre de Genève, deposited at La Musicale in 1973, after the theatre fire in 1951. In the collection are further programmes of concerts and shows given in this hall, but not listed in _onstage_. These documents can be consulted directly in the library. On the other hand, programmes of concerts given in other halls and collected by the theatre are included in _onstage_, such as those of the Orchestre de la Ville de Genève (the theatre orchestra).

It should also be noted that the collection of La Musicale is complementary to that of the library of the Geneva Conservatory and sometimes redundant.
